The Vajra Verses: A Prayer of the Fierce Inner Heat
from the Longchen Nyingtik

emaho
Emaho!
dakpa rabjam umé drongkhyer na
In the city of the infinite purity of the central channel
sem kyi dorjé chökü ngowo nyi
Is the vajra mind, the essence of the dharmakāya.
pungpo kham dang kyemché den sum lhé
The aggregates, elements, and sense-fields are the deities of the three seats.
namrol tsa gyü lamar solwa deb
I supplicate their manifestations— the root and lineage gurus.

lungsem yermé shyudé tsendali
May Caṇḍalī, the melting bliss of inseparable energy and mind,
khorlo nga yi pawo khandrö drong
Bring delight to the cities of the ḍākinīs and heroes in the five chakras
tsok kyi khorlö duwé nyé jé né
Through the gatherings of the tantric feast,
wang dang ga shyi yeshe rö gang shok
And may I be suffused with the experiences of the empowerments and the primordial wisdom of
the four joys.

khyepar chok gi tummö khorlo shyi
In particular, may the supreme fierce inner heat
lungsem lé rung dhuti tsa dü nam
Make pliable the energy and mind within the four chakras, and as the knots of the central channel
tsok dang jor tong gompé lam du drol
Are released as the paths of accumulation, unification, seeing, and meditation,
sa chü gyün ta tsuktor tser min shok
May energy and mind ripen at the crown protuberance, the conclusion of the ten stages.

nyönmong lungsem khorwé rangshyin ni
With the afflictions, energy, and mind— the nature of cyclic existence,
namdrol shyiwa yeshe lung chok gi
Brought under control through the supreme, utterly free and peaceful primordial wisdom energy,
rangwang gyur lé tsa kham yigé trin
May the channels and elements be spontaneously perfected
khorlo tsokchen sa la lhün dzok shok
On the stage of the Great Cloud Mass of Rotating Syllables.1

Samaya.
These vajra verses disclose all the most essential points related to the path of the completion
stage.
Seal — Seal — Seal

| Translated by Ryan Jacobson (with thanks to Khenpo Sonam Tsewang and Han Kop) and edited for
Lotsawa House as part of the Longchen Nyingtik Project, 2020.

Source: 'Jigs med gling pa mkhyen brtse 'od zer. 1973. Klong chen snying gi thig las: Gtum mo'i
gsol 'debs rdo rje'i tshig rkang. In Klong chen snying thig gi chos skor. New Delhi: A
'dzom chos sgar par khang: published by Ngawang Sopa. Vol 3. P. 52. https://www.tbrc.org/#library_work_ViewInWIndow-W21024%7CI1KG9719%7C3%7C1%7C1%7C726.
↑ i.e., the thirteenth of the sixteen stages according to the Nyingma system of inner tantras.
See https://www.rigpawiki.org/index.php?title=Sixteen_bhumis